---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/1/
type: stop
section_title: Introduction
title: The Roman Army
page_rank: 1
stop_id: 1
audio_file: stop_1.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 01-Introduction-01.jpg
   alt_text: Roman Army Re-enactors at Nashville, Tennessee.
---
## Salve! Welcome!
						
In this audio tour, we will explore one of history’s greatest armies – the Roman army! 

## The Roman Army
The Roman army existed for more than a thousand years, from the foundation of the city in the 8th century BC until the fall of the Roman Empire, traditionally dated to end of the 5th century AD. At every stage of Rome’s development from a small village to the largest empire in the ancient Mediterranean, the army played an important role. The Roman army impacted and was impacted by many aspects of ancient Roman life, including politics, religion, economics, and trade. 

## Army Structure
The Roman army was comprised of individuals from all levels of society and from all across the vast empire. In the first century AD, the Roman army was comprised of 28 legions, each containing 5000 men. Such men were required to be Roman citizens but could hail from anywhere in Italy. The noble senatorial class of Roman society monopolised the most important military commands, such as the Imperial Legate, the commander of legions. Men who were wealthy but not senatorial could join the Cavalry, known as the <i>Equites</i>. Ordinary Roman men were to join the legionnaires. As the city expanded its influence across the Mediterranean and Europe, the army expanded in size and evolved as it met new enemies and campaigned across new terrain. 

Each Roman legion was represented by the standards, a gilded statue of an eagle set on a tall pole that carried the flag and name of the legion. This was a symbol of the might and skill of the Roman Empire. 

The army was in many ways a microcosm of Rome itself and was fundamental to the prosperity and longevity of the empire. 

> Image: Roman Army Renactors. This work has been released into the public domain by its author, ChrisO at the Wikipedia project. This applies worldwide. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Roman_army_in_nashville.jpg
