---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/2/
type: stop
section_title: The Army and Building 
title: Stamped Roof Tiles 
page_rank: 2
stop_id: 2
audio_file: stop_2.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 02-second-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Roman Roof Tile stamped for Legio II Augusta
 - path: 02-second-stop-02.jpg
   alt_txt: Roman roof tile stamped for Legio II Augusta
---

## Away from the Battlefield
The Roman army was not constantly engaged in battle and for those times between campaigns, it was used as an effective source of manual labour. 

These two terracotta artefacts are roof tiles that were used to roof buildings. They were uncovered in Caerleon in Wales and date between AD 75 and 200. Roman tiles were made using local clay that was pressed into frame moulds, with excess clay being cut away with a wire cutter. You may have noticed writing on each of the tiles - these are stamps that were impressed into the wet clay before the tile was fired in a kiln. Each tile bears the same inscription, an abbreviation for Legion II Augustus. This indicates what legion made these tiles.  

### LEG II AUG

Roman legions in Britain began stamping their tiles towards the end of the 1st century AD, in order to prevent civilians from stealing their building materials for their own construction needs. The stamps also served to differentiate between construction materials of different legions at a time of rapid building activity in Roman-occupied Britain. 

## Caerleon Roman Fortress, Wales
Caerleon is an important site for historians of the Roman military as it is home to a Roman legionary fortress called the <i>Isca Augusta</i>. This was the headquarters of the Legio II Augustus, who participated in the invasion of Britain by Emperor Claudius that began in AD 43. The fortress was one of only three permanent legionary fortresses in Roman Britain and contained an impressive array of buildings, including houses, workshops, a bathing complex, granaries for storing food, and even an amphitheatre. These buildings left a lasting impact on the British landscape. 

> Image: Roof Tile with Legion Stamp, Caerleon, Wales, United Kingdom, Terracotta, AD 75-200. Purchased from B A Seaby Ltd, London, 1985, 1987. UQ 85.001
