---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/3/
type: stop
section_title: Army and Citizenship 
title: Military Certificate 
page_rank: 3
stop_id: 3
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 03-third-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Front (Obverse) of Military Certificate
 - path: 03-third-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Back (Reverse) of Military Certificate
---

While only full Roman citizens could serve in the legions and in the Praetorian Guard, other branches of the army were open to all freeborn men living in the Empire. Thus, we find men of many different ethnic and social origins in the auxiliary units of the Roman army. These men were expected to serve for anywhere from 16 to 30 years.  

Upon discharge, auxiliary soldiers were often granted Roman citizenship as a reward for their service. This grant of citizenship was formally presented to a veteran on an inscribed bronze tablet, which also contained a declaration of his new citizen rights. This is called a military diploma, and a small fragment of one is preserved here.

In its complete condition, a military diploma was formed by two pieces of bronze that folded together like the pages of a book. However, since Roman military diplomas used a standard format, it is possible to reconstruct what the grant of citizenship would have read: 

### The emperor Nerva has granted to them, their children and their descendants citizenship and the right of legal marriage with the wives they had when citizenship was granted to them, or, if any were unmarried, with those they later marry, but only a single one each.

The names of the soldiers were listed at the end of the inscription, which is now lost. A grant of citizenship was highly prized for non-Roman inhabitants of the Empire, as it came with legal and economic advantages, as well as social prestige. 

> Images: Military Certificate, Roman, from Norther Britain, Bronze, AD 100-103. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, 2002. Part of the Mr R Tooby Collection, Bath, before 2003. Acquired by Mr R Tooby, Bath, prior to 1993. Said to have been discovered in Northern England, prior to 1993. UQ 03.033
