---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/4/
type: stop
section_title: The Army and Gladiators 
title: Figurine of a Hoplomachus Gladiator 
page_rank: 4
stop_id: 4
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 04-fourth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Front of Gladiator Figurine
 - path: 04-fourth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Back of Gladiator Figurine
---

When we think of ancient Rome, we often think of the Colosseum and gladiators. But what do gladiators have to do with army? From the end of the 2nd century BC onwards, the army were trained in gladiatorial methods. This terracotta figurine from AD 1-100 represents a Roman gladiator of the type known as a <i>hoplomachus</i>. He lunges forward with his left arm raised, which perhaps once held a shield. His right arm is protected by armour and would have held his weapon. Large greaves protect both his legs. 

In 107 BC, reforms to the army meant that large numbers of men with no military experience were recruited. They needed efficient and effective training, so gladiatorial instructors were brought in to teach the men how to fight with swords. As both gladiators and soldiers relied heavily on their ability to use a sword, it’s not surprising that they shared techniques and training methods. 

Watching gladiatorial combat was fundamental to the mental preparation required of Roman soldiers, who believed that viewing blood sports increased military preparedness. Watching a gladiator, a social class not highly regarded in ancient Rome, disregard injury and pain to pursue glory reinforced a similar desire for victory in the soldier. If a lowly gladiator could do it, then a citizen solider surely could.  Gladiatorial combats were seen as a demonstration of the virtues admired among the Romans – courage, bravery, strength, skill, and the desire for glory. In fact, amphitheatres are often found near legionary fortresses, such as the fortress of Caerleon in Wales, and it was here that gladiatorial games would have been held. 

> Images: Figurine of Gladiator, Roman, Terracotta, AD 1 - 100. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, with funds donated by Dr D Watts, 2005. Acquired by General A Pitt-Rivers, from Mr GF Lawrence, London, 23/12/1896. Part of Pitt-Rivers Collection, Farnham, Dorset, 1883 - c. 1966. Part of Mr A Guttman Collection, Berlin, c. 1980 - 2004. Sold by Christies, London, Sale 5524, Lot 170, 28/04/2004. UQ 98.001
