---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/5/
type: stop
section_title: The Equites (Cavalry)
title: Lamp with Cavalryman  
page_rank: 5
stop_id: 5
audio_file: stop_5.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 05-fifth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Lamp with Cavalryman

---

## The Roman Cavalry
This is a common type of Roman oil lamp, produced in North Africa between AD 100 and 200. Lamps were an essential everyday item in the ancient world, as they provided much-needed indoor lighting for dark homes and were also used in funerary rituals. To aid in mass production, Roman lamps like this one were made using a mould.

The top of the circular body of the lamp is called the discus, and it is here that decoration can be found. On this lamp, it shows a stylised relief scene of a cavalryman riding a galloping horse, wearing armour and carrying a round shield on his left arm. The soldiers of the Roman army who fought on horseback were known as the <i>Equites</i>, and they were a unique class in Roman society. 

In the strictly ordered society of ancient Rome, the elite patricians were at the very pinnacle of the hierarchy and the <i>Equites</i> ranked just below. In order to be a member of this class, a property qualification of 100 000 <i>denarii</i> was required, in addition to the social expectation that he came from an upstanding family. Unlike the senatorial classes who were restricted in their economic endeavours, the <i>Equites</i> participated in a large variety of industries, including mining, manufacturing, and trade, and could become as wealthy as their patrician superiors. 

An equestrian wore a special <i>toga</i> to differentiate him from other senators and took part in a long tradition of heroism and military glory. The Eques on this lamp would have acted as a reminder to its owner of this tradition and the military and political importance of the Equestrian order. 

> Images: Lamp with Cavalryman, Roman, North Africa, Terracotta, AD 100-200. Gift of Dr J Tranberg, Hill End, 1991. Sold by Sotheby's, London, before 1972. Purchased from B. A. Seaby Ltd, London, 1983. UQ 83.049
