---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/6/
type: stop
section_title: Feeding the Roman Army 
title: Transport Amphora
page_rank: 6
stop_id: 6
audio_file: stop_6.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 06-sixth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Roman Transport Amphora
 - path: 06-sixth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Detail of handle with Greek inscription
---

## Transporting Food
This is a large Roman transport amphora from Italy dated 175-125 BC. Large <i>amphorae</i> like this were used for the storage and transport (usually by sea) of a variety of goods, principally grain, wine and olive oil. The shape of this example suggests that it was probably used for carrying olive oil. The narrow neck allowed for efficient sealing of the filled vessel (using a cork or ceramic plug held in place with mortar) while the two handles at the top and the knob at the base, which could be used as a third handle, enabled easy lifting of its heavy weight. <i>Amphorae</i> could also be re-used in a variety of ways: as storage vessels for other goods, as funerary containers or as infill for construction purposes. This amphora and its contents are thought to have originated in Italy but the vessel itself was found in Israel, which suggests the extent of the olive oil trade during the Roman period.

On one handle, there is a stamp with the Latin inscription <i>"LAPANES"</i>. The other handle has a Greek inscription <i>"NOYMHN[IO]"</i>. The word <i>Lapanes</i> may refer to Apani, a region near Brindisi in Italy where this amphora was made. Or, it could indicate the name of the estate owner where the oil was manufactured. The Greek word is probably the name of the potter who constructed this large vessel. 

## Feeding the Army
One of the most significant problems that was faced by the Roman army was the question of food. A single legion was comprised of 5000 men alone, and Rome had 28 of them. The Roman army usually travelled with a long caravan of animals that either carried food or where food themselves. Olive oil was a staple for a Roman solider, used for making basic foods like porridge and for seasoning. 

> Images: Transport Amphora, Roman, Israel, Terracotta, 125 - 75 BC. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, 2003. Said to have been collected in Israel, before 2003. UQ 03.058
