---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/7/
type: stop
section_title: Famous Battles
title: Quinarius with Dioscuri  
page_rank: 7
stop_id: 7
audio_file: stop_7.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Quinarius with Roma (Obverse) and Dioscuri (Reverse)
---

## The Legendary Past
The courage and glory of the army was woven into stories from the legendary past of Rome, when military success was achieved with the help of the gods and victory was divinely ordained. 

Here is a <i>quinarius</i> minted in Rome from 175-172 BC. The obverse shows Roma, the patron goddess of Rome, who wears a military helmet and often carries the insignia of battle. 

The reverse, the side that you can see, shows the twins Castor and Pollux, called the Dioscuri. Each wears a cuirass, cloak, and cap, and rides a charging horse forward, their spears poised for battle. There is a star above each of their heads, referring to their divine status. 

## The Battle of Lake Regillus
According to Roman legend, the Dioscuri were integral to the Roman victory at the Battle of Lake Regillus in the 5th century BC. This battle was fought between the newly established Roman Republic and the exiled former king of Rome, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus. The Roman victory ensured the survival of the Republic and put a final end to the tyrannical monarchy. Roman tradition states that Castor and Pollux fought on the side of the Romans, disguised as two young horsemen. 

The twins were the sons of Leda by two different fathers; Castor was the mortal son of the king of Sparta, while Pollux was the son of Zeus. According to mythology, the twins were born from an egg, alongside their twin sisters Helen of Troy and Clytemnestra. In Rome, the Dioscuri were valued for their skills in horsemanship and worshipped at a temple in the Forum. 

This silver <i>quinarius</i> reinforces the Roman values of military strength and courage and honours the legendary victory at Lake Regilius. Despite all the time that had passed, the battle was still important enough to Roman identity for it to be depicted on coinage. 

> Image: Quinarius with the Dioscuri, Roman, Italy, Silver, 175-172 BC. Purchased from Munzen und Medaillen AG, Basel, 1967. UQ C.029
