---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/8/
type: stop
section_title: Military Equipment
title: Phalera with Soldier between Standards
page_rank: 8
stop_id: 8
audio_file: stop_8.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 08-eighth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Phalera with Soldier between Standards
 
---

## Soldier's Kit
This circular bronze object is known as a <i>phalera</i> and would have been used as a buckle to secure military or equestrian equipment, like a sword sheath or a horse saddle. 

The scene shown on the <i>phalera</i> depicts a central figure wearing a high-crested helmet, full Roman armour, with a short tunic and boots. His right arm is bent upward holding onto a long lance while the left is at his side bearing his shield. Details of the figure’s face, musculature, and folds of his garments are incised onto the bronze to add more depth to the rendering. This figure is either a Roman soldier or Mars, the Latin god of war. 

## Trophies and Triumphs
He is flanked on either side by two trophies. A trophy, called a <i>tropaeum</i> in Latin, were constructed by Roman legions by mounting the armour and weapons of defeated enemies onto wooden stakes. Trophies were set up in the city of Rome in public spaces in order to demonstrate the victory to the Roman populace. Over time, these structures took on a more monumental form and were made of stone to serve as permanent reminders of the victory. These were monuments to Roman military might, but were also thanks-offerings to the gods for granting them victory. 

During the triumphal procession, where a victorious general would march through Rome on horseback, military trophies from their successful battles were carried by their soldiers, along with prisoners of war and other spoils. This was a demonstration of power for the general and military prowess for the soldiers. The trophy became a common motif of Roman art that symbolised the glory and success of the Roman army and its empire. 

> Image: Phalera with Soldier and Standards, Roman, Bronze, AD 200-300. Purchased from Fragments of Time, Massachusetts, 2008. Part of Axel Guttman Collection of Ancient Arms and Armor, Germany, 1989-1992. Sold by Christie, Manson & Woods, London, Lot 165, 28th April 2004. UQ 08.003
