---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/9/
type: stop
section_title: The Army and Medicine 
title: Medicine box with Asclepius  
page_rank: 9
stop_id: 9
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp9
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Roman Medical Kit
 
---

As you may expect, numerous Roman soldiers were wounded or fell ill during times of military engagement. As the Roman army ventured further afield into Europe, there arose a need for mobile medical assistant to travel alongside the army and treat the wounded on the field, rather than return them all the way to Italy. As such, Roman legions had their own physicians who accompanied them into war and fortresses often contained permanent hospitals – the first of their kind in the ancient world. 

Shown here is a complete medical set that would have been used by a Roman physician when he travelled. The bronze and iron medicine box has five compartments and its lid is decorated with a statue of Asclepius, the god of medicine and protector of doctors. Also contained within the box is a whetstone, used for sharpening surgery tools. These tools would have been stored safely in the cylindrical containers, along with various ointments required for the patient. This compact medical case would have been used by a physician when making house-calls to his patients or when travelling abroad with the army.

Alongside the medical box are the various tools used by ancient doctors. Probes made of bronze were used for the medical and cosmetic mixing of drugs and application of salves. Bronze hooks were used for holding infected tissue for inspection, while forceps gripped and aided in its removal. Tools used for surgery were often made with bronze handles and iron blades. Scalpels were perhaps the most essential tool in the doctor’s kit, viable for any number of procedures, while other tools had a more specialised purpose, like the bone lever that was used to help set fractures. 

> Image: Medical Kit, Roman, Bronze, Iron, AD 1-200. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd with funds from Dr Glenda Powell AM in Memory of Dr Owen Powell OAM, 2015. Part of Mr K Ishiguro Collection, Japan, before 1992. Acquired by Mr Y Yamanishi, Gallery Ur, Tokyo, Japan, 1992. Acquired by French Private Collection, from Gallery Ur, Tokyo, Japan, 20/06/2008. UQ 15.001
